# Portfolio Management: An Overview

### LOS 39.a: Describe the portfolio approach to investing.

Essentially, rather than viewing investments on an individual basis, viewing them as a whole. This allows you to **diversify**.

### LOS 39.b: Describe types of investors and distinctive characteristics and needs of each.

* Individual Investors
* Institutions (endowment, foundation): long investment horizons
* Bank: low risk, high liquidity
* Insurance companies. Property and Casualty (P&C) investment horizons likely shorter than Life Insurance
* Investment companies (mutual funds - high liquidity needs)
* Sovereign wealth funds

### LOS 39.c: Describe defined contribution and defined benefit pension plans.

* **Defined contribution pension plan**: employer contributes, investment decisions up to employee
* **Defined benefit pension plan**: employer states lump sum, and takes responsibility for performance of fund.

### LOS 39.d: Describe the steps in the portfolio management process:

1. Planning: evaluate risk tolerance, return objectives, time horizon, tax exposure, liquidity needs, income needs, etc. Usually ends up with an **investment policy statement** (IPS).
2. Execution: look at various asset classes, and diversify.
3. Feedback: keep updated, rebalance

### LOS 39.e: Describe mutual funds and compare them with other pooled investment products.

A **mutual fund** is a pooled investment vehicle. When you buy a share of a mutual fund, you own a mini version of its portfolio. Total value of the portfolio divided by outstanding shares is called **Net Asset Value** (NAV) of each share.

* *Open-end funds* can issue new shares at NAV. Money raised from issuing new shares is invested into securities. You can also redeem your shares. No-load funds do not charge fees for purchasing or redeeming shares, while load funds will do so.
* *Close-end funds*, no new shares, no redemption of shares. Trades like an equity.

###### Types of Mutual Funds:

* *Money market funds*: invest in short-term debt securities; low risk
* *Bond mutual funds*: invest in fixed-income securities. Can have a focus (e.g., on municipals, governments, corporates etc.)
* *Stock Mutual Funds*: 
	* Index Funds: passive, matches some sort of index
	* Active mutual funds

###### Other forms of Pooled Investments
* *Exchange Traded Funds (ETF)*: essentially a better version of an index mutual fund. Rather than buying a slice of the portfolio from a mutual fund, you buy these shares off the open market. Better for tax reasons too, because unlike the mutual fund, the ETF is not buying and selling securities like crazy, so you keep your capital gains taxes down. ETFs are close-end funds.
* *Separately managed account*: just an individual's portfolio. That's all.
* *Hedge funds*: minimum investments, less regulated than mutual funds.
	* Long/short
	* Equity market-neutral (hedging with shorts, focus on longs)
	* Long bias vs. short bias
	* Event-driven
	* Fixed-income arbitrage
	* Convertible bond arbitrage
	* Global macro
* *Buyout Funds* (PE)
* *VC*

