# Risk Management

This section is a high level overview on how to think about risk management. Very much like portfolio management! Well, when you really think about it at a deep level, it's very much one of those fractal concepts that applies to life and systems in general.

### LOS 40.a: Define risk management.

Essentially about balancing risk and reward in the broader context.

1. Determine risk tolerance
2. Identify and measure risks
3. Modify and monitor risks

### LOS 40.b: Describe features of a risk management framework

* **Establishing a system:** establishing processes and policies for risk governance
* **Determine needs**: what's the organization's risk tolerance?
* **What risks are there**? identify and measure
* **Manage and diversify**
* **Monitor**
* **Communicate what's being done**
* **Take a high level approach**

### LOS 40.c: Define risk governance and describe elements of effective risk governance.

So what does it mean to establish a system? Perhaps having a committee that systematically approaches risk measurement, integration of risks, and mitigation.

### LOS 40.d: Explain how risk tolerance affects risk amanagement.

Essentially, know thyself and take a weighted average approach to things.

### LOS 40.e: Describe risk budgeting and its role in risk governance.

Allocating your resources to assets or investments considering their risks. Examples of metrics: beta, value at risk, portfolio duration, returns variance. 

### LOS 40.f: Identify financial and non-financial sources of risk and describe how they might interact.

* Financial Risks:
	* Credit risk
	* Liquidity risk
	* Market risk (market prices of assets and interest rates)
* Non-financial risks:
	* Operational risk
	* Solvency risk
	* Regulatory risk
	* Governmental or political riskLegal risk
	* Model risk (risk that asset valuations are incorrect)
	* Tail risk (black swan)
	* Accounting risk

They all interact together too. Just use your common sense.

### LOS 40.g: Describe methods for measuring and modifyiing risk exposures and factors to consider in choosing among the methods.

This is pretty important - you gotta at least know the different measures of risk:

###### Asset Risks

* **Standard Deviation**: volatility of asset prices and interest rates. Not valid in non-normal distributions, especially those with engative skew or high kurtosis (fat tails)
* **Beta**: market risk of equity securities (and portfolios). Obtained by dividing cov/var, so it can be used to judge diversification.
* **Duration**: price sensitivity of debt securities in response to changes in interest rates

###### Derivatives Risks

* **Delta**: sensitivity of derivatives values to the price of the underlying asset
* **Gamma**: sensitivity of delta to changes in price of underlying asset (speed of change)
* **Vega**: sensitivity of derivatives values to **volatility** of underlying asset
* **Rho**: sensitivity of derivatives values to changes in the **risk free rate**


###### Value at Risk (VaR)

The minimum loss within a period of time, at a specific probability (e.g., 3% probability that VaR in one week is EUR 200m).

###### Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR)

Expected value of a loss, given that the loss exceeds a minimum amount.

###### Subjective and Market-Based Estimates of Risk

* Stress Testing: varying one variable to an extreme
* Scenario analysis: varying multiple variables

###### Modifying Risk Exposures

* Diversification
* Risk Transfer
* Surety Bond: insurance for if a third party fails to preform under a contract/agreement
* Fidelity bonds: pay for losses that result from employee theft or misconduct
* Risk shifting: usually thru derivatives. Buy options to hedge or guarantee minimum price etc.

