# Portfolio Risk and Return: Part I

Your biggest mistake in this section is confusing variance $σ^2$ with standard deviation $σ$. *Please* do not confuse the two. The important equations to remember are as follows:

$$σ^2 = \dfrac{\sum{(x_i - \overline{x})}}{N-1}$$

$$σ = \sqrt{\dfrac{\sum{(x_i - \overline{x})}}{N-1}}$$

$$p = \dfrac{Covariance_{a,b}}{σ_aσ_b}$$

$$Covariance_{a,b} = pσ_aσ_b$$

Standard Deviation of a portfolio containing two assets A and B:

$$SD_{Porftolio_{a,b}} = \sqrt{(w_aσ_a)^2 + (w_bσ_b)^2 + 2w_aw_bpσ_aσ_b}$$

### LOS 41.a: Calculate and interpret major return measures and describe their appropriate uses.

Short LOS right? tremendously important. These next few measures are literally the backbone of evaluating investment return, so you'd better know them down cold.

###### Holding Period Return (HPR), percentage return

This is about as simple as it gets: the percentage increase in value of an investment over a given time period.

$$holding\,period\,return = \dfrac{ending\,value}{beginning\,value} - 1 = \dfrac{P_t-P_0 + Div_t}{P_0}$$

###### Arithmetic Mean Return

Remember that by $R$, we're talking about a percentage return, not the actual amount earned. For instance, in Year 1 you earned 10% on \$100, $R_1=0.10$.

$$arithmetic\,mean\,return=\dfrac{R_1+R_2+...+R_n}{n}$$

###### Geometric Mean Return (percentage)

Compound annual rate, like in "compound" interest.

$$geometric\,mean\,return=\sqrt[n]{(1+R_1)*(1+R_2)*...*(1+R_n)} - 1$$

###### Money-Weighted Rate of Return

Essentially: IRR on a portfolio based on all of its cash inflows and outflows.

* *Inflows:* beginning value and additional deposits of cash, dividends or interest *received*, buying stocks
* *Outflows:* withdrawals of cash, ending value, selling stocks

This is a bit of a confusing concept, so let's use an analogy. Imagine a pool of money.

	|			|		|    |		|			|
	|Your Wallet|		|Pool|		|Investments|
	|___________|		|____|		|___________|

Anything going into the Pool is considered an inflow, and anything out of the pool is an outflow. So if your blue chip stock gives you a cash dividend, then it's an inflow to your pool. But if you reinvest the dividend, then it becomes an outflow (as it flows from the Pool back into the Investments box).

Once we define our inflows an outflows, we need to discount all the numbers back to the present value, and solve for the IRR that makes the following equation true:

$$PV_{inflows}=PV_{outflows}$$

Since the MWRR can be affected by movements between Your Wallet and the Pool, it's not the best metric to evaluate investment performance. That's where TWRR comes in:

###### Time-Weighted Rate of Return

TWRR is the compounded growth rate of \$1 invested over the period being measured. Essentially, you need to split your investment performance every time there is an inflow/outflow of cash, and calculate the individual performance of each segment. Then, you find the geometric mean of all the segments.

This is a much fairer way to evaluate manager performance, as it factors out the effect of withdrawals and deposits.

###### Other Measures

* Gross return: total return on security portfolio before all fees
* Net return: returns net of fees
* Pretax nominal return
* After-tax nominal return
* Real return: nominal return adjusted for inflation
	* Imagine you invest \$1,000, and get a 5% return = \$1,050
	* Inflation is 2%
	* Your real return is 1.05/1.02 =~ 1.0294
* Leveraged return

##### LOS 41.b: Describe characteristics of the major asset classes that investors consider in forming portfolios.

I'd consult Swensen's book on this, but here's the list according to the CFA Institute:

* Small-cap stocks
* Large-cap stocks
* Long-term corporate bonds
* Long-term Treasury bonds
* T-bills
* Inflation

Each of those has different levels of risk, return, and liquidity.

##### LOS 41.c: Calculate and interpret the mean, variance, and covariance (or correlation) of asset returns based on historical data.

Ready for some stats? The best way to remember these formulas is to get an intuitive understanding of how they work.

###### Standard Deviation

Essentially, how much does a variable deviate from its mean? If we wanted to find some way to quantify that, we'd probably want to look at how far away each sample data point is from the overall sample mean. How do we quantify that?

$$(sample_1 - mean) + (sample_2 - mean) + ... + (sample_n - mean)$$

In math lingo, let's call a the full set of sample data $X$, an individual point $x$, and the sample mean as $\overline{x}$. That brings us to:

$$\sum\limits_{i=1}^Nx-\overline{x}$$

But wait! What if you have positive and negative distances? Won't those cancel out? You're so right! So let's square each term:

$$\sum\limits_{i=1}^N(x-\overline{x})^2$$

Okay, now we have this massive number summing all the squared distances between each point and the sample mean. How do we get an average distance? Well, you take the average:

$$\dfrac{\sum\limits_{i=1}^N(x-\overline{x})^2}{N-1}$$

Hold up right there - that formula above is also known as *variance*. It should be a pretty large number, because you squared everything!

What if we wanted to get back to the original units? Sure, just unsquare everything:

$$\sqrt{\dfrac{\sum\limits_{i=1}^N(x-\overline{x})^2}{N-1}}$$

And voila! the formula for *standard deviation*.

###### Covariance and Correlation

Covariance is a pretty confusing one, but you need to understand it. Essentially, we want to see how much two variables covary - that is, move together.

Imagine these two variables plotted on a single graph: X and Y.

	|                             *
	|                        *
	|                  *
	Y                    *
	|                *
	|                 *
	|            *
	|        *         *
	|           *
	————————————————X————————————————
	
Covariance is essentially asking: when X goes up, does Y go up too? (likewise for down).

$$covariance=\dfrac{\sum{(x_i - \overline{x})(y_i - \overline{y})}}{number\,of\,points}$$

This might seem confusing for a second, but remember that in each calculation of $(x_i - \overline{x})(y_i - \overline{y})$, both $x$ and $y$ belong to the same 'point'. 

Covariance is similar to variance, in that the numbers themselves are not really interpretable. For interpretability, we need to convert covariance into *correlation*, which normalizes covariance as follows:

$$p_{1,2} = \dfrac{Cov_{1,2}}{SD_1SD_2}$$

Which can be rearranged as:

$$p_{1,2}*SD_1*SD_2 = Cov_{1,2}$$

Please both memorize and intuitively understand the above formulae.

### LOS 41.d: Explain risk aversion and its implications for portfolio selection.

Obvious. Risk aversion, seeking, and neutral.

### LOS 41.e: Calculate and interpret portfolio standard deviation.

This'll certainly come up on the CFA. How do you calcualte the SD of a portfolio, given that it has two assets?

$$Var_{portfolio} = (w_avar_a)^2 + (w_bvar_b)^2 + 2w_aw_bCov_{ab}$$

Take the squared weighted average of variances, and add on some covariance stuff. Looks confusing right? Well, this is actually just the Variance Sum Law. If two variables $X$ and $Y$ are independent, then:

$$Var(X+Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y)$$

But if they're correlated, you get:

$$Var(X+Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y) + 2Cov(X,Y)$$

As per LOS 41.c, we know that covariance can be rearranged as:

$$Cov_{a,b} = p_{a,b}*SD_a*SD_b$$

###### Memorize these two formulae:

Which means that the variance of a portfolio of two assets can be rewritten as:

$$Var(X+Y) = w_a^2var_a + w_b^2var_b + 2w_xw_yp_{x,y}SD_xSD_y$$

Remember that SD is the square root of variance, so the SD of a portfolio is:

$$SD(X+Y) = \sqrt{w_a^2var_a + w_b^2var_b + 2w_xw_yp_{x,y}SD_xSD_y}$$

Notice the role of $p$ in this process. 

### LOS 41.g: Describe and interpret the minimum variance and efficient frontiers of risky assets and the global minimum variance portfolio.

If we define risk as variance, then the portfolio with the lowest variance is the lowest risk portfolio.

Portfolios with the highest expected return at a given level of risk make up the **efficient frontier**.

The portfolio with lowest risk is the **global minimum variance portfolio**.

### LOS 41.h: Explain the selection of an optimal portfolio, given an investor's utility (or risk aversion) and the capital allocation line.

To understand the capital allocation line, we need to go over a few concepts.

A **utility function** represent's an investor's preferences regarding risk and return.

An **indifference curve** is a set of portfolios for which the utility for the investor is the *same*.

For risk averse investors, the curve is upward sloping (as in, the more risk you take on, the more reward you expect). This should be pretty intuitive.

Now let's introduce the idea of having a *risk free asset* in our portfolio. If you have a risk free asset, what happens to your portfolio variance? Well, let's look at the portfolio variance formula:

$$variance_{portfolio} = \sqrt{(w_aSD_a)^2 + (w_bSD_b)^2 + 2w_aw_bpSD_aSD_b}$$

If Asset A is a risk free asset, then it should have no correlation with anything. Its Standard Deviation should also be *zero*.

$$variance_{portfolio} = \sqrt{(w_a* 0)^2 + (w_bSD_b)^2 + 2w_aw_b* 0 *SD_aSD_b}$$

$$= \sqrt{(w_bSD_b)^2}$$
$$= w_bSD_b$$

If you think about this, it makes perfect sense: Asset A is riskless, so all the risk comes from the amount of money that you put into Asset B.

The **two-fund separation theorem** suggests that all the best portfolios are allocated between risky and risk-free assets (as opposed to non correlated risky assets).

Now if you took the *optimal risky asset* portfolio and plotted a line of all possible combos of this risky portfolio + a risk-free asset, you'd get a **capital allocation line**.

In other words: here's the best risky portfolio. How much risk-free investment do you want to throw into the mix? (not considering any more risky assets, because you've already found the optimum).

This is a pretty core concept: a) find the best risky portfolio, b) mix in risk free assets at will.

Now if you were to plot various indifference curves on the same chart as the capital allocation line, you'd see what kind of portfolios that investors would choose.

## Concept Checkers

1. 