# Portfolio Risk and Return: Part II

This chapter gets pretty technical about portfolio theory, but it's actually all very practical stuff. Let's dive in!

### LOS 42.a: Describe the implications of combining a risk-free asset with a portfolio of risky assets.

Again, it's this idea of a) finding the optimum portfolio consisting purely of risky assets, and b) infusing a bit of risk-free goodness into the portfolio. Just to jog your memory, let's recall the equation for finding the SD of a portfolio consisting of to assets A and B, of which A is risk free.

$$σ_{Portfolio_{a,b}} = \sqrt{ (w_aσ_a)^2 + (w_bσ_b)^2 + 2w_aw_bpσ_aσ_b}$$

If A is a risk free asset, then it has no standard deviation: $σ=0$, meaning:

$$σ_{Portfolio_{a,b}} = w_bσ_b$$

### LOS 42.b: Explain the capital allocation line (CAL) and the capital market line (CML).

We've already talked about the CAL, so let's discuss the CML.

CML operates under the assumption that all investors have the same expectations about risks, return, and correlations. Not in terms of their risk aversion, but the estimates of the values of the risks/returns etc.

Under this assumption, all investors should theoretically arrive at the same *optimum risky portfolio*. Think about it: if everyone agrees that assets A, B, and C have a risk (SD) of X and a return of Y, then the calculation for the optimum risky portfolio is a mechanical procedure. Everyone should arrive at the same ***market portfolio***.

If everyone has the same market portfolio, then everyone should also have the same capital allocation line for that portfolio. This is called the **Capital Market Line**.

Please make sure you understand this before moving on.

Now if we take a pure geometry approach to this:

$$y = mx + b$$

You'll notice that the $R_f$ risk free rate is the y-intercept, while the $R_M$ market portfolio is the endpoint of the line. $m = \dfrac{rise}{run}$, which is also $\dfrac{R_M - R_f}{σ_{M}}$. We use $σ_M$ because that's how long the "run" is. The $x$ that we "vary" is the amount of risk we decide to take on, represented by $σ_p$.

That brings our equation for the CML to be:

$$E(R_p) = R_f + \dfrac{R_M - R_f}{σ_M}σ_p$$

The expression $R_M - R_f$ is also termed the ***market risk premium***: the risk an investor bears for investing in the market portfolio.

The CML equation can also be rewritten as:

$$E(R_p) = R_f + (R_M - R_f) \dfrac{σ_p}{σ_M}$$

###### Borrowing and Lending

If we assume that money can be lent and borrowed at the risk free rate, then adding any risk free asset into your portfolio is in effect lending (as in, only lending offers no risk). With this assumption, everything before the Market Portfolio is a *lending portfolio*, and everything beyond the Marketfolio is a *borrowing portfolio*. Think about it: you either lend money to others who invest in the market portfolio, or you borrow money to invest in the market portfolio. Or you just put all your money into the market portfolio without any borrowing or lending behaviour.

### LOS 42.c: Explain systematic and nonsystematic risk, including why an investor should not expect to receive additional return for bearing nonsystematic risk.

Unsystematic risk can be diversified away, while systematic risk cannot. The market portfolio has no unsystematic risk; what remains is systematic risk.

	total risk = systematic risk + unsystematic risk

Now "risk", or volatility, is not a bad thing. Think about it: variance goes both ways, doesn't it? Up and down.

Your instinct is probably telling you: no risk, no reward. Or perhaps, higher risk, higher reward. But this is **not necessarily true**. Think about it this way: an early stage biotech startup will you a ton of money if it succeeds. But if it fails, you get nothing. This is almost purely unsystematic risk, as whether the science works has very little to do with broader macro factors like GDP.

But just because it has no systematic risk, it also gets no of the systematic rewards. For instance, a bull market will have very little to do with a biotech startup's stock, while a blue chip low risk stock will probably pretty correlated with the broader market movements.

### LOS 42.d: Explain return generating models (including the market model) and their uses.

Return Generating Models are used to predict returns on securities. Essentially a weighted model.

Multifactor models are used in economics to predict things like GDP.

**Factor Loading** is the multiple before each factor.

Single factor/index model: 

$$R_i - R_f = B_i * [R_m - R_f]$$

**Market Model** is used to estimate a security/portfolio's beta, which is its abnormal return above the market.

$$R_i = a_i + b_iR_m + e_i$$

where:

* $R_i$: return on Asset $i$
* $R_m$: market return
* $b_i$: slope coefficient
* $a_i$: intercept
* $e_i$: abnormal return on Asset $i$

### LOS 42.e: Calculate and interpret beta

$$beta = \dfrac{covariance_{asset,market}}{var_{market}}$$

$$p = \dfrac{covariance_{a,b}}{σ_aσ_b}$$

$$beta = \dfrac{pσ_{asset}σ_{market}}{σ_{market}^2}$$
$$beta = \dfrac{pσ_{asset}}{σ_{market}^2}$$

### LOS 42.f: Explain the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), including its assumptions, and the security market line (SML).

Let's summarize what we learned about the Capital Market Line (CML) again.

The big idea behind the CML is that, assuming homogenous investor expectations (security pricing, risk assessment etc. is all identical), there is only one possible optimal market portfolio. That means rational investors can only possibly pick some combination of that *market portfolio* and a *risk free asset* that returns a risk free rate $R_f$.

If you were to plot a line between the risk free portfolio ($σ=0$, $E(R)=R_f$), then your line would encompass the entire universe of possible efficient portfolios. This line is known as the **CML**.

###### Security Market Line (SML)

What if instead of looking at portfolio variance ($σ_p$), we looked a systematic risk, rather than portfolio risk? What is systematic risk again? It's the extent to which a security is affected by factors that drive the overall market. 

Why would we want to look at systematic risk over portfolio risk? Well, because that "portfolio risk" we're talking about is only the portfolio risk of the *market portfolio*! Only combinations of *market portfolio* + *risk free asset* plot onto that line. Nothing else. So if you have a non optimum portfolio, it won't plot onto the CML.

What if you wanted to look at other portfolios as well? Well all portfolios have systematic risk, so if your plotted against expected return and systematic risk, you'd get a line that contains ALL portfolios.

		|      /
		|     /
		|    * <- market portfolio
	E(R)|   / 
		|  /
		| /
		|/
		—————————————————————————————
			Covariance(i, market)

Now think about it: what are the coordinates of the market portfolio on the SML?

* $x = E(R_m)$
* $y = covariance_{i,market}$

Hold up there - so what is the covariance of the market portfolio and the... market portfolio?

Let's recall the formula for calculating covariance (there are two):

$$covariance_{i, market} = \dfrac{\sum(x - \overline{x})(y-\overline{y})}{N-1}$$

$$covariance_{i, market} = p_{i, market}σ_iσ_{market}$$

Let's dive into the second definition. We know that we're holding the market portfolio, so $p=1$, and $σ_i=σ_{market}$. If we plug that in, we get:

$$covariance_{i,market} = 1*σ_{market}σ_{market} = σ_{market}^2$$

Which, going back to our definition of coordinate $y$, we get: $y = σ_{market}^2$.

* $x = E(R_m)$
* $y = covariance_{i, m} = σ_{m}^2$

What does that mean for our SML equation?

$$E(R_m) = R_f + \dfrac{E(R_m) - R_f}{σ_{m}^2}(Covariance_{i, m})$$

If we were to rearrange this equation, we'd get:

$$E(R_m) = R_f + \dfrac{Covariance_{i, m}}{σ_{m}^2}(E(R_m) - R_f)$$

You'll probably recognize $beta$ in there:

$$E(R_m) = R_f + beta(E(R_m) - R_f)$$

Look familiar? this relationship between expected returns and systematic risk (beta) is known as the **Capital Asset Pricing Model**.

