# 11. Measures of Leverage

##### LOS 37.a: Define and explain leverage, busienss risk, sales risk, operating risk, and financial risk, and classify a risk.

**Leverage** here refers to the *amount of fixed costs a firm has*. By *fixed costs*, we're referring to fixed operating expenses like:

* fixed operating costs: building or equipment leases
* fixed financing costs: interest payment

```
Greater leverage means that a given change in sales will 
lead to a greater change in operating earnings
```

**Business risk** refers to risk associated with operating income:

* Sales risk
* Operating risk (uncertainty about operating earnings caused by fixed operating costs)

**Financial risk**: risk to shareholders when firm uses fixed cost (debt) financing.

##### 37.b: Calculate and interpret the degree of operating leverage, the degree of financial leverage, and the degree of total leverage.

###### Degree of Operating Leverage (DOL)

The idea of operating leverage is an extremely powerful business concept, so certainly get an intuitive understanding of it.

Recalling that *operating leverage* is defined as a metric that represents the sensitivity of a company's operating earnings to changes in sales. The equation to calculate is as follows:

$$Degree\,of\,Operating\,Leverage\,(DOL) = \dfrac{\%\,change\,in\,EBIT}{\%\,change\,in\,sales}=\dfrac{\dfrac{ΔEBIT}{EBIT}}{\dfrac{ΔQ}{Q}}$$

Where:

* $Q$ = quantity of units sold
* $P$ = price per unit
* $V$ = variable cost per unit
* $F$ = fixed costs

If you wanted to drill down further to the individual unit level:

$$DOL=\dfrac{Q(P-V)}{Q(P-V)-F}$$

This is hard to remember, so we have to break it down. $(P-V)$ represents the difference between sales price and the variable cost per unit (raw materials etc.). This is known academically as the **Contribution Margin**: the portion of sales that is *not* consumed by variable costs, and so contributes to the coverage of fixed costs.

Think about it this way: you're running an essay review service where you pay your editors \$30, but charge \$50. Your contribution margin is $20.

So we can really rehash the above equation as:

$$DOL=\dfrac{Q(P-V)}{Q(P-V)-F} = \dfrac{Total\,Contribution}{Operating\,Income} = \dfrac{Total\,Contribution}{Total\,Contribution-Fixed\,Costs}$$

This equation can be further rehashed when expanded:

$$DOL=\dfrac{Q(P-V)}{Q(P-V)-F} = \dfrac{QP-QV}{QP-QV-F} = \dfrac{S-TVC}{S-TVC-F}$$

where:

* $S$ = Sales
* $TVC$ = Total Variable Cost
* $F$ = Fixed Costs

Why does this matter? Imagine this: Microsoft vs. Due West Education. Microsoft has a large amount of fixed costs (investment into software development); that means they have high operating leverage. But once Microsoft sells enough software licenses to break even, every additional software license sold is pure profit. As in, the variable cost is extremely low. That means you have a business that becomes extremely profitable at scale. But if the software market dries up, Microsoft's earnings will take a hit, because their fixed costs remain.

On the other hand, Due West has almost no fixed costs (apart from an office lease - which can be substantial though). That means if they had very few clients, they wouldn't die. But it also means that their COGS scales with their revenue! The hypothetical thousandth student would incur the same high variable cost as the first student.

###### Degree of Financial Leverage (DFL)

Essentially, how much debt do you have? Calculated as follows:

$$DFL = \dfrac{\%Δ\,in\,EPS}{\%Δ\,in\,EBIT} = \dfrac{\%Δ\,in\,Net\,Income}{\%Δ\,in\,EBIT}$$

To get an intuitive understanding, recall that EPS is (roughly speaking) calculated as net income divided by the number of outstanding shares. Net income includes the effects of tax and interest, while EBIT specifically excludes the effects of tax and interest (Earnings Before Interest and Tax). Thus, this equation represents the degree of interest involved in your business financials.

To clarify this point, we can rehash the definition of DFL as follows:

$$DFL = \dfrac{EBIT}{EBT}$$

###### Degree of Total Leverage (DTL)

This is just a combination of the two forms of leverage earlier mentioned:

$$DTL = DOL * DFL$$

So, please know all these equations down cold.

##### LOS 37.c: Analyze the effect of financial leverage on a compay's net income and return on equity.

Let's walk through an example. Say that we were building a school, and were considering two forms of financing: 100% equity, or 50% equity and 50% debt. We have:

* \$500,000 in assets currently 100% financed with equity
* Fixed costs \$120,000
* Expected to earn \$100,000 in revenue

Let's run through these numbers:

||EBIT less 10%|Expected EBIT|EBIT Plus 10%|
|---|---|---|---|
|EBIT|\$90,000|\$100,000|\$110,000|
|Interest Expense|0|0|0|
|EBT|\$90,000|\$100,000|\$110,000|
|Taxes at 40%|\$36,000|\$40,000|\$44,000|
|Net Income|\$54,000|\$60,000|\$66,000|
|Shareholders' Equity|\$500,000|\$500,000|\$500,000|
|Return on Equity|$54/500=10.8\%$|$60/500=12\%$|$66/500=13.2\%$|

Recall that Shareholder's Equity, intuitively, is how much cash the shareholders put into the company in the first place. Here, they put \$500,000 into the company. Net income is how much the company made at the EOD. That's why ROE is:

$$ROE = \dfrac{Net\,Income}{Total\,Equity}$$

Now let's see the effects of financial leverage on this same company. Instead of raising \$500,000 from pure equity financing, we're going to raise half of that with debt, where interest rate on debt is 6%:

||EBIT less 10%|Expected EBIT|EBIT Plus 10%|
|---|---|---|---|
|EBIT|\$90,000|\$100,000|\$110,000|
|Interest Expense|\$15,000|\$15,0000|\$15,000|
|EBT|\$75,000|\$85,000|\$95,000|
|Taxes at 40%|\$30,000|\$34,000|\$38,000|
|Net Income*|\$45,000|\$51,000|\$57,000|
|Shareholders' Equity|\$250,000|\$250,000|\$250,000|
|Return on Equity|$45/250=18.0\%$|$51/250=20.4\%$|$57/250=22.8\%$|

You'll notice that the ROE is *significantly* higher when you gear up. Not just that though - notice that the rate of change of ROE (when you vary by 10%) is also way faster.