# 11. Working Capital Management

$$Working\,Capital=Current\,Assets-Current\,Liabilities$$

##### LOS 38.a: Describe primary and secondary sources of liquidity and factors that influence a company's liquidity position.

**Primary Sources of Liquidity**: sources of cash used in a company's normal daily operations. Includes:

* *cash balances* from selling goods/services, receivables, short-term investments etc.
* *short-term funding* trade credit from vendors, lines of credit from banks

**Secondary Sources of Liquidity**:
* Liquidating assets (short or long term)
* bankruptcy protection
* reorganization

So what influences a company's liquidity?

*Drags on Liquidity:* factors that make it harder for cash to come into the company. Things that delay or reduce cash inflows, or increase borrowing costs. Outstanding receivables, bad debts, obsolete inventory etc.

*Pulls on Liquidity*: factors that pull cash out of the company. Paying vendors too soon, or changes in credit terms that require repayment of outstanding balances.

##### LOS 38.b: Compare a company's liquidity measures with those of peer companies.

Alright, we're going into memorization zone here. Remember back in the FRA book the various ratios of liquidity? Well here they are:

**Liquidity Ratios**:

$$Current\,Ratio=\dfrac{current\,assets}{current\,liabilities}$$

$$Quick\,Ratio = \dfrac{cash+marketable\,securities+receivables}{current\,liabilities}$$

**Receivables Turnover**

$$receivables\,turnover=\dfrac{credit\,sales}{average\,receivables}$$

Now Receivables Turnover is tricky. Ideally we want to use credit sales (because by definition, a receivable is a credit sale), but looking purely at financial reports it's not always clear how much is credit vs. cash. In that case, it's customary to just use total sales.

Recall that Receivables turnover, intuitively, refers to the number of times that your receivables turn over during the year. If we want to calculate the average number of days that a receivable is held in account (AKA: number of days it takes for customers to pay their bills), we calculate as follows:

$$days\,of\,receivables=\dfrac{365}{receivables\,turnover}$$

**Inventory Turnover**

$$inventory\,turnover=\dfrac{COGS}{average\,inventory}$$

Think about it: the total value of things that go 'out' is literally the definition of COGS. This is asking: how many times does your inventory get cleared per year? If less than 1, then you're not selling all your inventory each year.

Following the "days of" logic, you can also calculate the number of days it takes for an inventory item to get sold.

$$days\,of\,inventory = \dfrac{365}{inventory\,turnover}$$

If this number is too high, then it means your inventory is going out pretty slow. Inventory could become obsolete. If too fast, then you don't have enough stock on hand, which could hurt sales.

**Payable Turnover**

What are payables? Money that you owe to suppliers. This is asking how many times a year do you pay your suppliers.

$$payables\,turnover=\dfrac{purchases}{average\,trade\,payables}$$

If we want to know how long it takes for company to pay its customers, simply find the inverse multiplied by 365.

$$days\,of\,payables=\dfrac{365}{payables\,turnover}$$

##### LOS 38.c: Evaluate working capital effectiveness of a company based on its operating and cash conversion cycles and compare the company's effectiveness with that of peer companies.

Two key terms:

* Operating Cycle: the number of day it takes for a company to turn its raw materials into cash proceeds from sales.
* Cash Conversion Cycle: the number of days it takes to turn cash invested in inventory back into cash

operating cycle = days of inventory + days of receivables

cash conversion cycle = days of receivables + days of inventory - days of payables

##### LOS 38.d: Describe how different types of cash flows affect a company's net daily cash position.

New term alert! **Net Daily Cash Position**. Defined as "uninveested cash balances a firm has available to make routine purchases and pay expenses as they come due". Sounds like plain ol' cash to me.

##### LOS 38.e: Calculate and interpret comparable yields on various securities, compare portfolio returns against a standard benchmark, and evaluate a company's short-term investment policy guidelines.

We're encroaching upon Fixed Income territory here. The first thing to recall is the definition of **discount**:

$$discount = \dfrac{face\,value - price}{face\,value}$$

I'm going to list the equations, but we'll dive deeper into this in the Fixed Income section.

$$discount\,basis\,yield=\dfrac{FV-price}{FV}*\dfrac{360}{days} = \%discount*\dfrac{360}{days}$$

$$money\,market\,yield=\dfrac{FV-P}{P}*\dfrac{360}{days} = holding\,period\,yield*\dfrac{360}{days}$$

$$bond\,equivalent\,yield=\dfrac{FV-P}{P}*\dfrac{365}{days\,to\,maturity}=holding\,period\,yield*\dfrac{365}{days}$$

###### Cash Management Investment Policy

So what's the goal of managing cash for a company? Well, you'd ideally want to invest in instruments of short maturities (to maintain liquidity), low risk (don't play with fire with your daily cash). 

##### LOS 38.f: Evaluate a company's management of accounts receivable, inventory, and accounts payable over time and compared to peer companies.

###### Receivables

When evaluating accounts receivables, we often look at what's called an **aging schedule**. Here's an example:

|Days Outstanding|March|April|May|
|---|---|---|---|
|<31 days|200|212|195|
|31-60 days|150|165|140|
|61-90 days|100|90|92|
|>90 days|50|70|66|

If we were to convert this into percentages:

|Days Outstanding|March|April|May|
|---|---|---|---|
|<31 days|40%|39%|40%|
|31-60 days|30%|31%|28%|
|61-90 days|20%|17%|19%|
|>90 days|10%|13%|13%|

This is a really straightforward and logical calculation/breakdown. Just keep in mind the core logic of receivables/credit sales.

###### Inventory Management

Inventory too low? out of stock, affect sales. Inventory too high? obsolete stock, devaluation. But you want to be careful when comparing company inventory turnover ratios: grocery stores will have high turnovers (perishables), while an ore company might have low turnover, as Zircon doesn't expire.

###### Accounts Payable Management

If you pay your payables too early, then you're using your cash a little unnecessarily (too tight a cash cycle). If too late, you could ruin your relationships with your suppliers.

Similarly with Receivables, we also have payables turnover and days of payables.

$$days\,of\,payables=\dfrac{accounts\,payable}{average\,day's\,purchases}$$

Imagine that - your year's accounts payabels divided by the average purchase every day. Average day's purchases = $\dfrac{annual\,purchases}{365}$.

How to interpret? Well, if you're like JD.com, you're such an important supplier that your days of payables can be pretty huge (meaning payables turnover is low). On the other hand, if you pay back very quickly, it could just mean you're taking advantage of supplier early payment discounts — and that you yourself have a nice source of short term capital to use.

###### Paying Earlier

Typically, if you pay your invoices from suppliers *earlier*, you should get a discount (cash is worth more today).

	2/10 net 60
	
Means that if an invoice is paid within 10 days, you get a 2% discount on the invoiced amount. If you do not take advantage of this early payment plan, then the net amount is due 60 days from the date of the invoice.

The cost of the company **not** taking this discount for early payment can be calculated as an annual rate:

$$cost\,of\,trade\,credit=(1+\dfrac{discount\%}{1-discount\%})^\dfrac{365}{days\,past\,discount} - 1$$

This formula is pretty hard to grasp intuitively. $\dfrac{\%discount}{1-\%discount}$ is the *holding period return* to the firm of taking the discount. This formula is further discussed in Quantitative Methods.

##### LOS 38.g: Evaluate the choices of short-term funding available to a company and recommend a financing method.

This is one of the most practically important things to know.

###### Sources of Short-Term Funding from Banks

* **Lines of Credit**, in order of reliability:
	* *Uncommitted Line of Credit*: credit for a certain amount, but can refuse to lend if circumstances change
	* *Committed (regular) line of credit*: committed for a certain period of time, usually less than a year; banks will charge fee for this commitment.
	* *Revolving line of credit*: long-term.

Collateral for these lines of credit can include fixed assets, inventory, accounts receivable etc. A ***blanket lien*** is a claim to all current and future firm assets in case of default.

* **Banker's Acceptances:**: guarantee from the bank of the firm that a payment will be made upon receipt of goods. You can sell a Banker's Acceptance at a discount for immediate cash.
* **Factoring**: selling your receivables at a discount from face value

###### Non-Bank Sources of short-term funding

Issuing short-term debt (commercial paper), using nonbank finance companies etc. Direct placement is when you issue directly to investors.
