# 10. Cost of Capital

##### 36.a: Calculate and interpret the weighted average cost of capital (WACC) of a company

* $k_d$: pre-tax cost of debt
* $k_d(1-t)$: post-tax cost of debt; this is used to calculate WACC
* $k_{ps}$: cost of preferred stock
* $k_{ce}$: cost of common equity

WACC Formula:

$$WACC = w_d[k_d(1-t)] + w_ek_{ce} + w_{ps}k_{ps}$$

##### 36.b: Describe how taxes affect the cost of capital from different capital sources.
Because interest on corporate debt is tax deductible, the true cost of debt is actually lower than $k_d$. Payments to common or preferred stockholders have no such deductions.

##### 36.c: Describe the use of target capital structure in estimating WACC and how target capital structure weights may be determined

This is literally just the proportion of financing from each source. Using WACC assumes that a company will maintain its current capital structure as it raises more funds.

##### 36.d: Explain how the marginal cost of capital and the investment opportunity schedule are used to dtermine the optimal capital budget

*Marginal cost of capital curve:* imagine an upwards sloping curve. Rationale? The more capital you raise, the more expensive it becomes. 

*Investment opportunity schedule:* Place your investment opportunities in order of decreasing IRR. You'll have a downward sloping curve.

The point at which these two curves intersect is the *Optimal Capital Budget*. Essentially says that if IRR becomes lower than your marginal cost of capital, you should stop raising money/stop executing less lucrative projects.

##### LOS 36.e: Explain the marginal cost of capital's role in determining the net present value of a project.

WACC should be used for a project with an average risk profile (same as existing projects). If the project is riskier, then it should command a higher WACC, etc.

##### 36.f: Calculate and interpret the cost of debt capital using the yield-to-maturity approach and the debt-rating approach

So how do we calculate the (after-tax) cost of debt used in calculating WACC?

after-tax cost of debt = interest rate - tax savings = $k_d - k_d(t) = k_d(1-t)$

If a company's YTM is not publicly available (company debt is not publicly traded), then you can find comparable proxies. For instance, if the company's debt is AAA rated with avg. maturity of 15 years, then you can look on market for AAA 15-year bond rates.

##### 36.g: Calculate and interpret the cost of noncallable, nonconvertible preferred stock

Cost of preferred stock:

$$k_{ps} = D_{ps} / P$$

where:

* $D_{ps}$ = preferred dividends
* $P$ = market price of preferred stock

This is just a rearrangement of the preferred stock valuation model $P = D_{ps}/k_{ps}$

##### 36.h: Calculate and interpret the cost of equity capital using the capital asset pricing model approach, the dividend discount model approach, and the bond-yield-plus risk-premium approach.

The hardest part to calculating WACC is calculating the cost of equity. Let's start with the first approach:

###### 1. Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)

Before we dive into the equation, let's think about what the CAPM actually means. Essentially, when an investor decides to buy an asset, they must be compensated for both the time value of money and the riskiness of the asset.

For instance, if I'm putting RMB 100,000 into your product for 3 years, then I should at the *very least* get a standard risk free return for that investment. Now if your asset is a risky asset, then I should get a return commensurate to the risk that I'm bearing. Here's the formula:

$$k_{ce} = R_f + B[E(R_m) - R_f]$$

* $R_f$ represents the *risk free rate*. This is typically LIBOR, or the rate of US Treasury notes.
* $B$ represents the volatility of the stock, which is calculated as follows: $B = cov_{stock,market}/var_{market}$

The second half of the equation, $E(R_m - R_f)$, is also known as an *market risk premium*, where $R_f$ is the expected rate of return on the market. This is essentially the reward an investor will expect for taking on the risk of the market portfolio.

Keeping in mind that $B$ represents the volatility of the equity-in-question, in relation to the market, the equation should make sense. By multiply the market risk premium by the Beta of the stock, you're getting the *equity risk premium* (premium expected from holding the stock).

###### 2. Dividend Discount Model

If the dividends of a stock are expected to grow at a constant rate $g$, then the value of a stock today can be calculated using the Gordon Growth Model:

$$P_0 = \dfrac{D_1}{k_{ce} - g}$$

Where:

* $D_1$ is the dividend per share *one year from today*
* $k_{ce}$ is the required rate of return on common equity
* $g$ is the firm's expected constant growth rate

To calculate required rate of return on common equity ($k_ce$), we can rearrange the equation:

$$k_{ce} = \dfrac{D_1}{P_0} + g$$

Here, the core difficulty is forecasting the dividend growth rate, which can be calculated as follows:

$g$ = (retention rate) (return on equity) = (1 - payout rate) (ROE)

##### 36.i: Calculate and interpret the beta and cost of capital for a project.

Project beta is a measure of an *individual project's risk*. This is initially quite tricky, but if you understand the overall logic, it's pretty straightforward.

So imagine you're a fruit import/export company that wants to get into the fruit juice business. You want to start a new business unit that focuses on taking your delicious imported fruit and mash it up into that organic juice people like so much nowadays. How do you calculate the cost of capital for this project?

Find comparables! You try to find any public fruit juice companies, and make your calculations based off of their publicly available data.

Thinking back to our WACC equation, we'll notice that the difficult thing to calculate is *cost of equity*. Looking at the equation for cost of equity (as per the CAPM):

$$k_{ce} = R_f + B[E(R_m) - R_f]$$

We'll notice that the missing piece of data is $B$. Now we can calculate *beta* for this project by calculating the *beta* for the pure-play fruit juice ListCo.

So how do we get the beta for pure-play ListCo? Covariance / Variance, remember? You'll need large amounts of historic data for this calculation.

Once you have the equity beta, you need to *unlever* it (the unlevered version is referred to as *asset beta*). How do you unlever equity beta? Well, you need to figure out the capital structure of the pure-play ListCo, and use that info to negate the effects of leverage on Beta (leverage increases risk and Beta).

For example, if pure play ListCo has a capital structure of 20% Debt, 80% Equity, then it would have a D/E ratio of 2/8 = 1/4 = 0.25

$$Beta_{asset}=\dfrac{Beta_{equity}}{1+(1-t)\dfrac{D}{E}}$$

But TBH, this equation is easier to understand when rearranged as follows:

$$Beta_{project}=Beta_{asset}[1+((1-t)\dfrac{D}{E})]$$

As in, the beta of a (naked) asset needs to be "levered" so that it accounts for the risk of debt. Now if the project has *no debt*, $\dfrac{D}{E}=\dfrac{0}{1}=0$, and the equation becomes:

$$Beta_{project}=Beta_{asset}$$

Which means any increase in debt increases project beta.

Now to understand the "unlevering" equation from before, just rearrange the equation for Project Beta. Does that make sense? Look over the Beta Project equation and it should click.

##### 36.j: Describe uses of country risk premiums in estimating the cost of equity.

Equity markets in the US versus Jakarta are going to be very different (hint: one of them is riskier). When calculating the cost of equity, country risk needs to be factored into the equation. Which equation? In this case, the CAPM:

$$k_{ce}=R_f+B(r_m - r_f)$$

When you add in the Country Risk Premium (CRP):

$$k_{ce}=R_f+B(r_m - r_f + CRP)$$

**^ This is the most important equation to remember.**

To calculate the CRP, we first need to understand the idea of a **sovereign yield spread**:

**Sovereign Yield Spread:** Difference in yields between the developing country's government bonds and US Treasury bonds of similar maturity.

To estimate an equity risk premium for a country, we need to **adjust** this sovereign yield spread by the **ratio of volatility** between the country's equity market and its government bond market. 

Ratio of Volatility between equity market and bond market:

$$\dfrac{annualized\,standard\,deviation\,of\,equity\,index\,of\,developing\,country}{annualized\,std.\,dev.\,of\,sovereign\,bond\,market\,in\,terms\,of\,the\,developed\,market\,currency}$$

Take the standard deviation of the equity index and divide it by the standard deviation of the bond market.

Now take the sovereign yield spread and multiply it by this ratio:

$$CRP = sovereign\,yield\,spread * ratio\,of\,volatility$$

##### LOS 36.k: Describe the marginal cost of capital schedule, explain why it may be upward-sloping with respect to additional capital, and calculate and interpret its break-points.

Note the definition here: **marginal cost of capital (MCC)** is the cost of raising the *last new dollar of capital*. Bottom line: raising more capital increases your cost of capital. 

The idea of **break points** is that there are specific points at which your cost of equity or cost of debt increase. For instance, it'll cost you 4.2% to raise between 0-99m, 4.6% to raise between 100-199m, and 5.0% to raise between 200-299m. Those are specific breakpoints.

These questions are really straightforward: just calculate the thresholds. But be careful about numbers.

##### LOS 36.1: Explain and demonstrate the correct treatment of flotation costs.

When a company raises equity capital through bankers, the bankers will charge what's called a **flotation cost**. The key the to know is that **flotation costs are not an ongoing expense**, therefore the way to adjust for flotation costs is to **adjust initial project cost**, rather than adjusting your $k_e$.

Let's break down an example scenario:

* $400,000 cash outlay
* Expected cash flows of $150,000/year for next four years
* Tax rate = 35%
* pretax cost of debt $k_d = 6.5%$
* Current share price is $36/share
* Expected dividend is $2/share
* Company expected growth rate is 5%
* Company target cap structure is 50/50
* Flotation cost for equity financing is 4.5%

We'd like to calculate NPV. But first, we need WACC. Let's recall the WACC formula (ignoring preferred):

$$WACC=r_d(1-t)k_d + r_{ce}k_{ce}$$

We do not know $k_{ce}$, but know all the rest:

$$WACC=\dfrac{1}{2}*(1-0.35)*0.065+\dfrac{1}{2}*k_{ce}$$

How do we calculate $k_{ce}$? Since we're given dividend information, we can use the Gordon Growth Model to calculate the required rate of return on equity. Recall the Gordon Model below:

$$Price=\dfrac{Dividend_{next\,year}}{k_{ce} - growth\,rate}$$

Or, more succinctly:

$$P=\dfrac{D_1}{k_{ce} - g}$$

When we rearrange to solve for $k_{ce}$, we arrive at:

$$k_{ce}=\dfrac{D_1}{P} + g$$

Plugging in the values given in the question prompt, we get:

$$k_{ce} = \dfrac{\$2}{\$36} + 0.05 = 10.6\%$$

Plugging this number into our previous WACC equation, we get:

$$WACC=\dfrac{1}{2}*(1-0.35)*0.065+\dfrac{1}{2}*0.106 = 0.021 + .053 = 0.074$$

With WACC coming out to $7.4\%$, we can calculate our NPV. Before we do that, let's look at our raw cash flows:

|Year|Inflow|Outflow|
|---|---|---|
0|0|(\$400,000)|
|1|\$150,000|0|
|2|\$150,000|0|
|3|\$150,000|0|
|4|\$150,000|0|

But we can't just do a standard NPV — we need to account for flotation costs. Recall that flotation costs are calculated as a percentage of the amount of equity capital raised. Those costs are then added into the initial project cash outflow. The project requires \$400,000 initial cash outlay, 50% of which comes from equity financing. That means our flotation costs are \$400,000 * 0.5 * 0.045 = \$9,000. Which means we need to readjust our cashflow. To calculate NPV, we need to discount future cashflows back to the present, and compare that amount with our initial cash outlay.

|Year|Inflow|Outflow|Present Value|
|---|---|---|---|
0|0|(\$409,000)|(\$409,000.0)|
|1|\$150,000|0|\$139,677.8|
|2|\$150,000|0|\$130,065.9|
|3|\$150,000|0|\$121,115.5|
|4|\$150,000|0|\$112,781.0|
|||**Total Present Value**|\$94,640.2|



