# Understanding Fixed Income Return

### Using the BA-II Plus

If you want to calculate the future value of an annuity, you're essentially asking the calculator: what lump sum do I need to pay at the end of the annuity (FV) in order to make the present value (PV) of the annuity equal to zero?

### Annualized Holding Period Return

This annualized return is probably the core metric here, and makes the investment comparable to other types of investment.

It's a pretty straightforward calculation:

$$\dfrac{Total\,Return}{Total\,Investment}^{1/N} - 1$$

The key thing in fixed income calculations is to recall that $Total\,Return$ consists of both the Face Value and coupons and reinvestment interest.

### LOS 54.a: Calculate and interpret the sources of return from investing in a fixed-rate bond

Three sources of return:

* Coupon and principal
* Reinvested coupon payments
* Capital gain or loss if bond is sold prior to maturity

The relationship here is pretty intuitive. At the time you purchased the bond, it had a *YTM (Yield-to-Maturity)*, which represents the actual return of the bond (as opposed to the coupon rate of the bond). YTM depends on your purchase price.

There are a few scenarios:

1. If you hold to maturity, your return is the YTM at purchase.
2. If you sell before maturity, then your RoR will equal YTM if YTM at sale has not changed since purchase.
3. Assuming you buy-and-hold, if the market YTM increases after purchase (but before first coupon date), you will see a higher return than the YTM at purchase (and vice versa for decrease/lower)
4. Assuming you hold for a short period, if the YTM increases after pruchase (but before first coupon date), you'll earn a lower rate than the YTM at purchase.
5. Assuming holding for a long period of time, if YTM decreases after purchase (but before first coupon date), your RoR will be loewr than YTM at purchase.

The fundamental idea behind this section is that the longer your investment horizon, the more susceptible you are to reinvestment risk (but not to interest rate/market price risk). The shorter your investment horizon, the more susceptible you are to interest rate (market price) risk, but not reinvestment risk (because you do not have time to reinvest).

Note that market price risk here is equated with interest rate risk, because market price is dependent upon the prevailing YTM.

Now let's look at these in depth:

###### Scenario 1: Buy and Hold to Maturity

This is pretty straightforward: how much cash did you get in total, and how much did you put in? Calculate your return, then annualize it.

Your return is the total influx of money (including coupon payments, sale/maturity value, interest earned on reinvested coupons), and your investment is your purchase price.

To obtain the annualized version of the return, simply raise to the power of a fraction.

Usually, you'll be required to know two key things: purchase price, total return.

Let's calculate the purchase price of a bond where: 5-year bond, 8% coupon rate, 10% YTM, face value of $100,000.

This is a discount bond, because the coupon rate is lower than the market YTM. This means the bond will sell for less than its face value. Using our BA-II Plus calculator, we can find the present value of the bond by:

* I/Y = 10%
* FV = $100,000
* N = 5 years
* PMT = \$100,000 * 0.08 = \$8,000
* CPT(PV) = -\$92,418.43

The present value is negative, because that's how much you'd have to shell out in order to obtain the above bond.

Now what if we wanted to calculate the bond's total cash return? Well, we'd need to know the coupon amount, as well as the amount received from reinvesting coupons at the prevailing YTM.

There are two ways to calculate this. The most intuitive is just to assemble the following expression:

$$\$8000 + \$8000(1.1) + \$8000(1.1)^2 + \$8000(1.1)^3 + \$8000(1.1)^4 = \$48,840.8$$

And how much of that comes from reinvested coupons? Well simply subtract the total coupon cash amount:

$$\$48,840.8 - 5(\$40,000) = \$8,840.8$$

The second method, using the BA-II Plus, is to ask the question: what is this above cashflow amount at time of maturity (not what it's worth, but its actual amount)? This question can also be understood as: what is the face value at maturity that would make this cashflow's present value equal to zero?

That probably sounds convoluted, but think about it for a moment. If the present value of a bond were zero (and we assume a constant positive coupon rate), then the FV (Face Value) paid at maturity would have to cancel out all those coupons. The FV paid at maturity would be the total cash amount received from the bond.

So let's plug that into the BA-II:

* PMT = \$8,000
* N = 5 years
* PV = 0
* I/Y = 10%
* CPT(FV) = \$48,840.8

Voila! We arrive at the same amount.

And don't forget - to calculate the *total* cash amount, we need to add back in the FV of \$100,000, which gives us \$148,840.8

Now if we wanted to calculate the annualized holding period RoR (Rate of Return), that should be pretty simple:

$$\dfrac{Total\,Return}{Total\,Investment}^{1/N} - 1$$
$$\dfrac{\$148,840.8}{\$92,418.43}^{1/N} - 1$$
$${1.61}^{1/5} - 1 = 0.0999$$

Which, due to rounding errors, is effectively equivalent to the YTM of 10%. This should make sense, because your return when held to maturity should equal the market YTM at time of purchase.

###### Scenario 2: Sell Bond before Maturity, YTM unchanged at time of sale, then RoR is equal to YTM at purchase

If the market YTM is unchanged at time of sale, you will earn the same YTM as time of purchase. Here we encounter the term **carrying value**, which is defined as the value of the bond reflecting amortization of discount/premium, using the YTM at time of purchase. Capital gains/losses are measured relative to this carrying value. 

Let's walk through an example: a 8-year bond with 7% coupon rate, FV of \$10,000, YTM of 15%. What's our purchase price?

* I/Y = 15%
* PMT = \$700
* N = 8 years
* FV = \$10,000
* CPT(PV) = \$6,410.14

Now assuming that we sell the bond at the end of Year 3, and the YTM at time of sale is the same (15%). We need to figure out the fair price at time of sale:

* I/Y = 15%
* PMT = \$700
* N = 5
* FV = \$10,000
* CPT(PV) = \$7,318.276

It's higher than before. This makes sense, because the as the maturity date gets closer, the discount (this was a discount bond) gets amortized. At maturity, the bond should be equal to 10,000 (the FV).

Recall that in order to calculate total return, we also need to include the amount we made from coupon payments and interest from reinvested coupons.

We can calculate this by asking: what is the future face value that will make the annuity's present value equal to zero?

* I/Y = 15%
* PMT = \$700
* N = 3
* PV = 0
* CPT(FV) = \$2,430.75

To verify this answer, we can do it the more intuitive way. Three years of coupon payments, each reinvested:

$$700 + 700(1.15) + 700(1.15)^2 = 2,430.75$$

Voila! Now we add these two numbers together to find our total return:

$$7,318.28 + 2,430.75 = 9,749.03$$

Let's annualize the return:

$$\dfrac{9,749.03}{6,410.14}^{1/3} - 1 = 0.15$$

And we get the same return as our purchase YTM. That is consistent with our scenario statement.

What if YTM were different? If YTM decreases and you sell, then you should make money. If YTM increases and you sell, then you should lose money. To prove this, let's look at our next scenarios:

###### Scenario 3: if YTM increases (decreases) before first coupon, hold-to-maturity will earn return greater (less) than YTm at purchase

Intuitively, this makes sense because your reinvested coupons will earn you more money than you paid for at purchase (because they are reinvested at the YTM).

If you really think about this, you'll realize something very key about the value of bonds (assuming creditworthiness is constant). Fluctuation in bond value comes from the reinvestment rate from COUPONS, and has nothing to do with the actual balloon payment at the end. The balloon payment is held constant whether YTM rates rise or fall. It's the coupon reinvestment rate (the YTM) that affects how much money you make!

Now you can imagine if YTM falls while you hold the bond, your coupons are going to be reinvested at a lower than expected rate. That means your bond will decrease in value!

Recall again how to calculate coupon + reinvestment interest (very important) - refer to above.

###### Scenario 4: for short term holders, if the YTM increased (decreased) before the first coupon date, the investor would see a decreased (increased) return

If you are a short term holder (investment horizon of one year) then you won't be affected by reinvestment risk. However, you are susceptible to interest rate risk (YTM fluctuations). Think about it: after one year, you will receive your coupon straight, and will not have time to invest it. When you sell it, the next buyer will calculate the price based on the current market YTM.

###### Scenario 5: For long term bond holders, if YTM decreases after purchase (before first coupon date), then you will get a lower return.

This is the same as the first scenario - holding to maturity. Changes in rate of return are based on changes in reinvestment rate.

### LOS 54.b: Define, calculate, and interpret Macaulay, modified, and effective durations.

###### Macaulay Duration

The "Macaulay Duration" is the **weighted average term to maturity of promised cashflows** of the bond. In other words, it's the number of years the bond must be held for the present value of promised cashflows to equal the amount paid for the bond. You can imagine the bond has a massive balloon payment, its duration would be closer to the bond's maturity. If it's front loaded, then duration would be lower.

###### Modified Duration

Modified Duration represents the **approximate % change in a bond's price for 1% change in YTM**.

$$ModDur = \dfrac{MacDur}{1 + YTM}$$

For semiannual, this becomes:

$$ModDur = \dfrac{MacDur}{1 + YTM/2}$$

###### Approximate Modified Duration

In absence of the MacDur (Macauly Duration), we can approximate ModDur (Modified Duration) using the hypothetical price of bonds given changes in YTM:

$$\dfrac{P_- - P_+}{2*P_0*∆YTM}$$

Where:

* $P_-$: price of the bond if YTM decreases by specified amount
* $P_+$: price of the bond if YTM increases by specified amount
* $∆YTM$: specified amount change in YTM
* $P_0$: price of bond if YTM unchanged

The following provides the average change in price:

$$\dfrac{P_- - P_+}{2}$$

Introducing the $P_0$ term normalizes the change into a percentage:

$$\dfrac{P_- - P_+}{2 * P_0}$$

Adding the $∆YTM$ number of percentage points scales the duration measure to a 1% change (price change in response to a 1% change in YTM), in line with convention.

Note that this is a linear estimate, so this is a good approximation for small changes in YTM, but not for larger ones.

###### Effective Duration

If a bond is callable (embedded options), then things get more complicated. To calculate this, you use $∆curve$ instead of $∆YTM$.

### LOS 54.c: Explain why effective duration is the most appropriate measure of interest rate risk for bonds with embedded options.

Because callable bonds will be called when interest rates change — and if they are called, future cashflows are no longer predictable.

### LOS 54.d: Define key rate duration and describe the use of key rate durations in measuring the sensitivity of bonds to changes in the shape of the benchmark yield curve

### LOS 54.3: Explain how a bond's maturity, coupon, and yield level affect its interest rate risk.