# Fixed Income Securities: Defining Elements

### LOS 50.a: Describe basic features of a fixed-income security.

Think of it this way. For a bond to work, we need to know the following:

* Who issued it?
* When is it due?
* What's the pay like? (coupon rate and frequency)
* What's the face value? (par)
* How would you like your money? (currency)

All very intuitive - use your common sense.

### LOS 50.b: Describe the content of a bond indenture; LOS 50.c: Compare affirmative and negative covenants, providing examples of each.

Also known as **trust deeds**, **bond indentures** are the legal contract between bondholders and bond issuers.

Affirmative covenants state what the bond issuer must do: for instance, make timely payments, comply with law, or pay back the money in event of change in ownership.

Negative convenants state what the bond issuer *cannot* do: issue more debt, cannot pledge same collateral multiple times etc.

### LOS 50.d: Describe how legal, regulatory, and tax considerations affect the issuance and trading of fixed-income securities.

###### Types of Bonds

Bonds are called different things depending on the locale of the bond.

**Domestic Bonds**: Issued by a firm domiciled in Country A, traded in Country A, denominated in A's currency.

**Foreign Bonds**: Issued by firm in Country A, traded in Country B, denominated in B's currency.

**Eurobonds**: Issued outside jurisdiction of any one country, traded in Country A but denominated in B's currency.

**Global Bonds**: Eurobonds that trade in Country A, but are denominated in B, are global bonds.

Eurobonds are referred to by the currency they are denominated in (e.g., Eurodollar, Euroyen, Euroyuan etc).

There are **bearer** bonds and **registered** bonds. Difference is evidence of ownership; a bearer bond is owned by the person that owns the bond. A registered bond is owned through registering ownership.

###### Issuing Entities

SPVs or SPEs. Company creates an SPV, sells loans to the SPV. The SPV issues bonds, whose coupon payments are provided for by the loans. This is called **securitization**. May get a better rate for these bonds, because it separates the risk of the parent company from the bond.

###### Credit Enhancement

Essentially, how does the issuer get a better rate?

* Overcollateralization
* Cash reserve fund, excess spread account
* Tranching (waterfall structure)

###### Taxation of Bond Income

Interest is taxed as standard income. If you sell the bond before maturity, it counts as capital gain.

Government and municipal bonds may have exemptions.

### LOS 50.e: Describe how cashflows of fixed-income securities are structured.

###### Typical Bond Structure

Typical bonds have what's called a **bullet structure**. Periodic payments of interest, with a *balloon payment* (interest + lump sum) at the end. 

If periodic payments include repayment of principal, then it is an **amortizing** loan. The loan is *fully amortizing* if, by the end of the last payment, the entire principal has been paid.

###### Sinking Fund Provisions

Sinking fund provisions essentially allow bond issuers to periodically buy back their bonds at either market price or *par value*, whichever is lower. This lowers credit risk (because less principal is due upon maturity), but increases reinvestment risk (because the issuer may be able to buy back at par value — when interest rates have decreased, and the bond's market value is higher than its issuance price).

TL;DR: safer, but potentially makes less money.

###### Floating-Rate Notes

Exactly what it sounds like. Rather than paying a fixed coupon rate, it pays based on some floating reference rate plus an interest margin.

This is a pretty flexible instrument: a **variable-rate note** is where the interest margin is also variable; an **inverse-floater** is where the bond interest rate rises when the reference rate declines.

###### Other Coupon Structures

* **Step-up coupon bond**: the coupon rate periodically "steps up" (increases), thus somewhat shielding the investor from market yield hikes
* **Credit-linked bond**: where coupon payments are linked to the credit rating of the issuer
* **Payment-in-Kind (PIK) bond**: coupon payments made by increasing the principal amount on outstanding bonds.
* **Deferred Coupon Bond**: regular coupon payments do not begin until a period of time after issuance
* **Index-Linked Bond**: coupon payments or principal value based on a commodity index.
	* Inflation-linked bonds ("Linkers") are a popular type
		* *Indexed-annuity bonds:* Fully amortizing bonds with periodic payments directly adjusted for inflation or deflation
		* *Indexed zero-coupon bonds:* payment at maturity adjusted for inflation
		* *Interest-indexed bonds:* coupon rate adjusted for inflation; principal amount unchanged
		* *Capital-indexed bonds:* Coupon rate constant, but principal value varies with inflation (e.g., TIPS).

### LOS 50.f: Describe contingency provisions affecting the timing and/or nature of cash flows of fixed income securities and identify whether such provisions benefit the borrower or the lender.

Contingency provisions: optionality in case of some predefined event. Also known as *embedded options*.

###### Call Options

The most common provision is a **call option** whereby the issuer gets the right to redeem all or part of the bond at a specific price.

* **American Style**: bonds can be called anytime after lockout period
* **European Style**: bonds can be called on specific date
* **Bermuda Style**: bonds can be called on specific dates after lockout

To keep things fair for the bondholder, you have a **make-whole** provision, where call price is not fixed, but includes a variable payment based on present value of future coupons.

###### Put Options

Benefits the bondholder: option to sell the bond back to the issuing company. Optionality comes at a price, so bondholders pay a premium for putable bonds.

###### Convertible Bonds

Bonds convertible into stock.

* **Conversion Price**: price per share at which the bond can be converted into common stock
* **Conversion Ratio**: par value of bond divided by conversion price
* **Conversion Value**: market value of shares if converted

###### Warrants

Essentially conditions you tack onto a bond to make it more attractive. Almost like options.

###### Contingent Convertible Bonds

"CoCos": bonds that convert from debt to equity automatically upon an event occurrence. (bank example, to maintain low debt levels/minimum equity requirements. automatic conversion increases equity, decreases debt).
