# 15c: Introduction to Fixed-Income Valuation

YTM = market discount rate

### LOS 52.a: Calculate a bond's price given a market discount rate.

Literally just discounted cashflow calculation. Take note of key terms:

* **Yield-to-Maturity (YTM)/Redemption Yield:** the market discount rate

When bond yields increase, your current bond is devalued (because you're still paying the same rate). Vice versa.

### LOS 52.b: Identify the relationships among a bond's price, coupon rate, maturity, and market discount rate (yield-to-maturity).

1. Decrease of YTM (market discount rate) makes a bond worth MORE (because you bought it at the price it was worth at the time, and now bonds are paying less! your old bond is now paying 'more')
2. If a bond's coupon rate is greater than its YTM, then it is sold at a premium. Vice versa for selling at discount.
3. Percentage decrease in value when YTM increases by a given amount is *smaller* than the increase in value when YTM decreases by the same amount (**price-yield relationship is convex**)
4. Lower coupon rate, more sensitive to changes in YTM
5. Longer maturity, more sensitive to changes in YTM

###### Relationship Between Price and Maturity

As a bond matures, its price converges to the par value.

### LOS 52.c: Define spot rates and calculate the price of a bond using spot rates.

Spot rates are the discount rates for a single payment to be made in the specific future. For instance, the discount rate for money received in 2 years is 4%, while rate for money received in 3 years is 5%.

Just plug in the spot rate to its corresponding year (denominator).

### LOS 52.d: Describe and calculate the flat price, accrued interest, and the full price of a bond.

Okay, this section is very important, but also very confusing. To fully understand bond pricing, we need to start from first principles.

**Helpful Links:** [Investopedia on Bond Pricing](https://www.investopedia.com/university/advancedbond/bond-pricing.asp), [Derivation of Annuity](http://www.ftsmodules.com/public/texts/bondtutor/appendix1a.htm)

###### Bond Pricing (Vanilla Method)

How do we calculate the present value of a bond? Well, if it's a bullet structure with a balloon payment at the end, then you simply discount each round of payments with the appropriate discount rate.

$$PV = \dfrac{C_1}{(1+r)} + \dfrac{C_2}{(1+r)^2} + ... + \dfrac{C_N}{(1+r)^n} + \dfrac{PMT}{(1+r)^n} $$

Notice the last term: that's really just the balloon payment (value at maturity) and the final coupon payment.

We can also think of this as an *annuity* plus a *discount bond*. It just so happens that we have a formula to calculate annuities!

$$PV_{annuity} = PMT * \dfrac{1-(1+i)^{-n}}{i}$$

Where $i$ = interest rate, $n$ = number of periods, and $PMT$ = coupon payment. How did we get this formula?

###### Deriving the Annuity Formula

Let's break down the calculation for a constant cashflow, paying coupon amount $c$, at a market interest rate of $i$, for $N$ years. Let's recall that $C$ is a constant in an annuity.

$$PV_{annuity} = \dfrac{C}{(1+i)} + \dfrac{C}{(1+i)^2} + ... + \dfrac{C}{(1+i)^n} $$

If we subsitute $a = \dfrac{1}{1+r}$, then we can rewrite the formula as:

$$PV_{annuity} = Ca + Ca^2 + ... + Ca^n$$

$$PV_{annuity} = C(a + a^2 + ... + a^n)$$

Now let's do some shenanigans, adding and immediately subtracting $(a^{n+1} + a^{n+2}...)$, which goes up to infinity:

$$(a+a^2+a^3+...+a^n) + (a^{n+1} + a^{n+2}...) - (a^{n+1} + a^{n+2}...)$$

Now notice that when you add the first and second terms together, you get a series going to infinity, so the expression really becomes:

$$(a+a^2+a^3+...) - (a^{n+1} + a^{n+2}...)$$

Now if we take the first terms out of each component expression, we get this:

$$a(1+a+a^2+...) - a^{n+1}(1 + a + a^2...)$$

Which simplifies into:

$$(a-a^{n+1})(1 + a + a^2 + ...)$$

Notice that $(1 + a + a^2 + ...)$ is really just a geometric progression. The formula for the sum of a geometric progression is:

$$\sum{ar^k} = \dfrac{a}{1-r}$$

(going till infinity), plugging ours in, we get:

$$(1 + a + a^2 + ...) = \dfrac{1}{1-a}$$

Going back to our equation:

$$(a-a^{n+1})(1 + a + a^2 + ...)$$

We can plug the sum of geometric progression formula in as:

$$(a-a^{n+1})\dfrac{1}{1-a}$$

Which also equals:

$$\dfrac{a}{1-a} - \dfrac{a^{n+1}}{1-a}$$

Earlier we substituted $a = \dfrac{1}{1+r}$. If we plug it back in, we get:

$$\dfrac{\dfrac{1}{1+r}}{1-\dfrac{1}{1+r}} - \dfrac{\dfrac{1}{1+r}^{n+1}}{1-\dfrac{1}{1+r}}$$

Simplifying, this becomes:

$$\dfrac{\dfrac{1}{1+r}}{\dfrac{1+r}{1+r}-\dfrac{1}{1+r}} - \dfrac{\dfrac{1}{1+r}^{n+1}}{\dfrac{1+r}{1+r}-\dfrac{1}{1+r}}$$

$$\dfrac{\dfrac{1}{1+r}}{\dfrac{r}{1+r}} - \dfrac{\dfrac{1}{1+r}^{n+1}}{\dfrac{r}{1+r}}$$

$$\dfrac{1}{1+r} * \dfrac{1+r}{r} - (\dfrac{1}{1+r})^{n+1} * \dfrac{1+r}{r}$$

$$\dfrac{1}{r} - \dfrac{1}{r(1+r)^{n}}$$

This can be further simplified into the annuity formula (don't forget the $C$ we left out earlier):

$$\dfrac{C}{r}(1 - \dfrac{1}{(1+r)^n})$$

The annuity formula we saw earlier looked like this:

$$PV_{annuity} = PMT * \dfrac{1-(1+i)^{-n}}{i}$$

Which is really just an inverted version of the formula above.

$$PV_{annuity} = \dfrac{PMT}{i}(1 - \dfrac{1}{(1+i)^n})$$

###### Bond Pricing (Vanilla Formula Continued)

So earlier we talked about how a bond was really just an annuity plus a discount bond. Now we have both formulas, we should know why the following works:

$$PV = \dfrac{C}{r}(1 - \dfrac{1}{(1+i)^n}) + \dfrac{PMT}{(1+r)^n} $$

###### Pricing Between Periods (Accrued Interest)

Above, we found a great formula for how to calculate the PV of a bond at its coupon periods. Now we need to calculate the value *between periods* (accrued interest).

This is actually super straightforward. What's the coupon amount per session? What's the time that has elapsed in the current session? Take a pro-rated amount, and that's your accrued interest amount.

Note that there are two ways of doing this: using actual number of days, or using the 30/360 convention (count the current month as 30).

Finally:

Flat Price = Full Price - Accrued Interest.

Flat Price = Clean Price

Full Price = Dirty Price

### LOS 52.e: Describe Matrix Pricing

To estimate the required YTM (or price) of a non-traded/infrequently-traded bond, you need to take existing information and interpolate.

Pretty straightforward logic. 

### LOS 52.f: Calculate and interpret yield measures for fixed-rate bonds, floating-rate notes, and money market instruments.

First, a few definitions:

* **Effective Yield:** compound return of the bond
* **Bond Equivalent Yield (BEY):** annual yield on a zero coupon bond
	* $\dfrac{FV - price}{price} * \dfrac{365}{d}$
* **Effective Annual Yield (EAY):** compounded return in a year              
* **Periodicity:** how frequently coupon payments are made
* **Semiannual Bond Basis:** two times the semiannual discount rate
* When you convert a quarterly yield into an annual yield (not EAY), multiply by 4.

###### Fixed-Rate Bonds

* **Semiannual Bond Basis:** Effective Semiannual Yield * 2
* **Effective Annual Yield:**
	* *From Quarterly Paying Bond:* $(1 + effective\,quarterly\,yield)^4 - 1$
	* *From Semiannually Paying Bond:* $(1 + effective\,semiannual\,yield)^2 - 1$
* **Effective Semiannual Yield:**
	* *From Effective Quarterly Yield:* $(1 + effective\,quarterly\,yield)^2 - 1$
	* *From Effective Annual Yield:* $(1 + \,effective\,annual\,yield)^{1/2} -1$
* **Effective Quarterly Yield:**
	* *From Effective Semiannual Yield:* $(1 + effective\,semiannual\,yield)^{1/2} -1$


**Current Yield**

$$current\,yield=\dfrac{annual\,cash\,coupon\,payment}{bond\,price}$$

Essentially, annual interest over what you paid.

**Yield-to-Call**
The yield of the bond assuming it gets called at a specific date

**Yield-to-Worst**
The worst rate amongst various call scenarios.

###### Floating-Rate Note Yields

Coupon rates reset periodically based on a reference rate. Reference rate for *next* period depends on current reference rate.

Margin depends on risk of the company compared with risk of reference security.

*Quoted Margin:*  margin used to calculate bond coupon payments
*Discount Margin/Required Margin:* margin required to return the FRN to its par value (as in, it's selling at \$100, but the original par value was \$110, so *discount margin* is 10%)

If the FRN credit quality decreases, then discount margin will be larger than quoted margin (makes intuitive sense: your quoted margin was the difference in credit quality between you and the reference security at issuance; any subsequent change in that difference is reflected in the difference between the discount and quoted margins).

How to calculate? Quoted margin is straightforward. But the Discount Margin is used as the discount rate (reference rate + discount rate) when you do your bond calculations.

###### Yields for Money Market INnstruments

* **Add-on Interest:** where interest is calculated based on original principal, and does not decrease with repayment of principal

Add-on yield based on a 365 day year is the **bond equivalent yield**

### LOS 52.g: Define and compare the spot curve, yield curve on coupon bonds, par curve, and forward curve.

###### Yield Curve
Graphing the return for bonds of different maturities (term structures)

###### Spot rate yield curve
Recall that spot rates are zero-coupon rates. Usually quoted on a semiannual bond basis.

###### Yield curve for coupon bonds

###### Par bond yield curve

