# Intro to Asset Backed Securities (ABS)

### LOS 53.a: Explain benefits of securitization for economies and financial markets

**Securitization** is when an entity buys a financial asset, and then issues debt supported by cashflows from those assets. There are many benefits, including:

* Reduced intermediation costs (reduced profit to third party middle man)
* Legal claim to underlying is stronger, as the entity holds only those underlying assets
* Securitized assets are more liquid than bank loans
* Banks can lend more through securitization, because it doesn't gather up on your balance sheet so the bank's parent entity has lower leverage
* A more tailored product towards investors (fixed income based on specific type of mortgage, as opposed to a bank's public stock).

### LOS 53.b: Describe securitization, including the parties invovled in the process and the roles they play.

*Origination:* where you loan the money

*Servicer:* Collect money (interest, principal payments), sends out delinquency notices, the "thugs"

The *Issuer/Trust* is the SPE that buys loans from the seller/originator

Recall that the Issuer/Trust is a separate entity from the Seller/Originator, so that the financial conditions of one do not affect the other.

### 53.c: Describe typical structures of securitizations, including credit tranching and time tranching.

Credit tranching is simply having subordinated tranches absorb credit losses before senior tranches. There are different types of tranching, but *waterfall* tranching is when the subordinated tranche receives only "overflow" (what's left) from more senior tranches.

Time tranching is essentially: senior tranches get to eat first. All principal repayments go towards seniors until senior tranche principal has been repaid. This is in some ways even better, because you get paid back first.

### 53.d: Describe types and characteristics of residential mortgage loans that are typically securitized.

The primary characteristic of residential mortgage loans is that the house is the collateral. Therefore one key metric you'd care a lot about is the *loan-to-value* ratio (LTV). The higher the LTV ratio, the riskier the loan.

$$LTV=\dfrac{Loan}{Value}$$

Let's go through a couple key characteristics of residential mortgages.

###### Maturity
In the US, typically 15-30 years. In Europe, 20-40. In Japan, can go up to 100 years.

###### Interest Rate
This is a very important topic, very relevant to the lives of the average citizen. 

* **Fixed Rate Mortages** have a rate that is unchanged over the life of the entire loan
* **Adjustable Rate Mortgages (ARM)** have interest rates that can change over time (such as index-referenced mortgages, based of LIBOR or something)
* **Hybrid Mortgages** are fixed for a while, but then become variable
* **Rollover/Renegotiable Mortgages** change to a different (but specific) rate after an initial fixed rate period
* **Convertible Mortgages** allow the *borrower* the option to changed at some point through the loan.

###### Amortization of Principal

Pretty straightforward: fully-amortizing, partially amortizing, or interest-only (where there is no principal amortized over the period, and the balloon amount is the original loan principal).

###### Prepayment Provisions

You could...

* Sell the house and repay the mortgage
* Refinance the mortgage at a lower rate

Some loans will have prepayment penalties (which benefit the lender).

###### Foreclosure

Non-recourse loans mean that the lender only has claim on the collateral, and cannot go after your other assets. Of course, this means non-recourse borrowers will more likely default on their loans (e.g., if the house value decreases too much).

### LOS 53.e: Describe types and characteristics of residential mortgages-backed securities, including mortgage pass-through securities and collateralized mortgage obligations, and explain the cash flows and risks for each type.

Residential-Mortgage Backed Securities (RMBS) are loans whose underlying assets are residential mortgages.

###### Agency Mortgage

An *Agency RMBS* is a security that is issued by a quasi-governmental agency (Fannie Mae, Ginnie Mae, Freddie Mac etc.). These securities are called *mortgage pass-through securities*, as they represent a claim on the cashflows of the mortgage pool.

After all servicing and guarantee fees, the *pass-through rate* (return on the security) should be lower than the rates of the mortgages.

Two key metrics for these mortgage pools are the *Weighted Average Coupon (WAC)* and the *Weighted Average Maturity (WAM)*.

Agency RMBS mortgage pools have stricter standards (with loans that fit the standards being *conforming loans*, and those that don't as *non-conforming loans*), while non-Agencies are more flexible in the mortgages they allow into the pool.

###### Non Agency Mortgage

Non-conforming loans can be securitized by non-agencies, and are called *non-agency RMBS*.

###### Prepayment Risk
Recall that mortgage borrowers have the option to prepay their loans (perhaps they won the lotto, or they just refinanced their mortgage at a lower rate). If they repay too little, or repay too much, this'll screw with the pricing and risk of the RMBS, because *mortgage loans used as collateral for agency MBS have no prepayment penalties*.

When prepayments are too slow, it's called *extension risk* (life of the RMBS is getting longer), and when prepayments are too quick, it's called *contraction risk*. Think about it - if people are paying back their loans earlier than expected, then the amount of underlying backing the security will be less.

**Single Monthly Mortality (SMM)**: percentage by which prepayments reduce month-end principal balance (compared with no repayments).

**Conditional Prepayment Rate (CPR)**: annualized measure of prepayments.

There is a standard benchmark for prepayment rates rate too (set by the Public Securities Association (PSA)). PSA of 100 means that the repayment rate is 100% of the benchmark PSA rate.

### Collateralized Mortgage Obligations (CMO)

CMOs are securities collateralized by RMBS, meaning they are securities secured by other securities. They can be tailored to investors' preferences, such that each tranche has its own characteristics.

###### Sequential Pay CMO

We can mitigate repayment risk by separating the investment product into tranches (short tranche gets its principal paid off first; long tranche last).

###### Planned Amortization Class (PAC) CMO

A PAC tranche makes predictable payments regardless of actual prepayments to the underlying MBS (recall that the CMO is a security backed by a mortgage backed security - RMBS). Risk has to go somewhere, so the prepayment risk is shfited to the non PAC tranche (known as a *support tranche*).

The amount that support tranches are able to support in order for PAC tranches to stay on schedule is known as an **initial PAC collar** (numerated in PSA).

The way to think about the relationsohip between PSA and Tranche life can be summarized in this table:

|PSA Speed|PAC I Tranche|Support Tranche
|---|---|---|
0|13.2|24.0
50|8.8|21.2
100*|6.5|17.1
150*|6.5|13.3
200*|6.5|10.4
250*|6.5|5.2
300*|6.5|2.9
350|5.9|2.4

\* Within the initial PAC collar

##### Non-Agency RMBS

These are not backed by the quasi governmental agencies, so there is more credit risk. Thus they need credit enhancements.

This is achieved through:

* Subordination (Credit Tranching)
* Shifting interest mechanism (suspends payments to subordinated tranches until credit quality of senior tranches is restored)

### LOS 53.g: Describe characteristics and risks of commercial mortgage-backed securities

Commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), as opposed to *residential* mortgage backed securities (RMBS), are backed by revenue producing real estate like offices, shopping centers, warehouses, hotels etc.

Key difference is that RMBS loans are repaid by the home owners, while the CMBS loans are repaid by the real estate investors (who in turn rely on tenants and customers for cashflow). So you got it - they are **non-recourse** loans. Therefore CMBS focuses on credit risk of property rather than credit risk of the borrower. For CMBS, there are two key metrics:

###### Debt-to-service-coverage ratio (DSC)

$$\dfrac{net\,operating\,income}{debt\,service\,cost}$$

Net operating income (NOI) is calculated after real estate taxes, but before income taxes.

###### Loan-to-value ratio
The same metric from RMBS:
$$\dfrac{current\,mortgage\,amount}{current\,appraised\,value}$$

As with any long-term debt obligation, the bondholder requires some level of call protection to reduce reinvestment risk (or in the case of mortgages, prepayment risk).

For CMBS, you have:

**Loan-Level Call Protection**

* Prepayment lockout
* Defeasance
* Prepayment penalty points (percentage of principal amount prepaid)
* Yield maintenance charges (borrow compensates for lost interest, thus making lenders indifferent to prepayment)

**CMBS-Level Call Protection**: done through tranching

Typically, amortization schedules are longer than loan terms, meaning there is a balloon payment at the end. If *balloon risk* means that the borrower cannot make the payment, so they extend term into a 'workout period' with a higher interest rate.

### LOS 53.h: Describe types and characteristics of non-mortgage asset-backed securities, including the cashflows and risks of each type.

ABS can also be backed by:

* Small business loans
* Accounts receivable (factoring)
* Credit card receivables
* Auto loans
* Home equity loans
* Manufactured housing loans

Let's focus on two: auto loans and credit card receivables.

Auto loans are pretty similar to the ABS mechanisms. But Credit Card ABS are different.

*Where does CC ABS cashflow come from?* Financing charges, annual fees, principal repayments.

Credit cards have periodic payment schedules (due every month, remember?), but the balances are revolving (people use the cards every month, so there's probably a similar balance each month). Therefore, there isn't really any amortization here. As in, they're always owing new money each month. This also means that CC ABS holders do not get principal repayments (at least during a lockout period).

If there is prepayment, then you can just use the prepayment money to buy more credit card debt.

### LOS 53.i: Describe collateralized debt obligations, including their cashflows and risks.

**Collateralized Bond Obligations (CBOs)**: backed by corporate or emerging market debt

**Collateralized Loan Obligations (CLOs)**: backed by leveraged bank loans

**Structured Finance CDOs**: collateral from ABS, RMBS, other CDOs, and CMBS

**Synthetic CDOs**: collateral is a portfolio of credit default swaps on structured securities




