# 15b: Fixed-Income Markets: Issuance, Trading, and Funding

### LOS 51.a: Describe classifications of global fixed-income markets.

You can classify fixed-income products across a few dimensions:

* Type of issuer
* Credit quality
* Original maturities: money market vs. capital market
* Coupon structure: floating rate vs. fixed-rate
* Currency denomination
* Geogrpahy
* Indexing
* Tax status

### LOS 51.b: Describe the use of interbank offered rates as reference rates in floating-rate debt.

Example is LIBOR: the rate that banks make unsecured loans to each other.

### LOS 51.c: Describe mechanisms available for issuing bonds in primary markets.

**Public offering** sold to general public, typically with help of an investment bank. When this happens, the bond could be *underwritten* (investment banks purchase the offering and market it to others), or *best efforts offering* (banks get commission for selling, but do not commit to buying the offering).

**Private placement** - sold to qualified investors.

Government bonds are typically sold through auction. For instance, US Treasuries mainly go through **primary dealers**.

### LOS 51.d: Describe secondary market for bonds.

Most bonds are traded OTC. Settlement (exchange of bonds for cash) for bonds are usually day of trade (T) or next business day (T+1). Corporate bonds might be longer. This is where Digital Asset comes in! Post transaction settlement.

### LOS 51.e: Describe securities issued by sovereign governments.

Governments issue **sovereign bonds**. Most recent bonds are **on-the-run**/**benchmark** bonds.

They issue everything from fixed-rate, floating-rate, and inflation-indexed bonds.

### LOS 51.f: Describe securities issued by non-sovereign governments, quasi-government entities, and supranational agencies.

Non-sovereign government bonds are like city, province, or project bonds.

Agency/quasi-governmental: Fannie Mae, GSEs.

Supranational bonds: World Bank, IMF.

### LOS 51.g: Describe types of debt issued by corporations.

###### Bank Debt

Bilateral or Syndicate loans. LIBOR-based, variable-rate loans.

###### Commercial Paper

Short term debt (270 days or else, so exempt from SEC registration) for creditworthy corporations. Typically used for bridge financing.

Commercial paper often *rolled over* upon maturity. Some cases, will not be able to rollover if company risk profile gets higher, or systematic risk (2008).

Typically issued as discount bonds.

###### Corporate Bonds

Term maturity (all due at once) vs. serial maturity structure (due one after another).

* Short Term: < 5 years
* Medium Term: 5-12 years
* Long Term: 12+ years

**Medium Term Notes (MTNs)**: 5-10 years, up to 99

### LOS 51.h: Describe structured financial instruments.

Securities designe dto change the risk profile of an underlying debt security — usually with derivatives. For example: ABS, collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).

1. Yield Enhancement Instruments
Regular payments, but redemption value depends on whether a specific event has happened. If event occurs, buyer gets less redeemed.

2. Capital Protected Instruments
保本. Usually a combination of a bond and call options on a security.

3. Participation Instruments
Payments based on some reference rate. E.g., floating-rate notes.

4. Leveraged Instruments
E.g., inverse floater. Can be leveraged too.

### LOS 51.i: Describe short-term funding alternatives available to banks.

Apart from customer deposits (retail deposits), banks can also offer certificates of deposit (CDs) that mature on specific dates.

Central Bank funds market: borrow excess reserves from other banks. Fed Funds Rate. LIBOR.

### LOS 51.j: Describe repurchase agreements (repos) and the risks associated with them.

Commitment to sell a security to someone, then buy it back later at a higher price. In effect: lending funds to seller with the security as collateral.

*Repo rate* is the implied interest rate. Based on length, *overnight repo* or *term repo*.

Typically, repo rate is lower than bank loans or other short term borrowing.

Of course, you need some space between the value of the collateral and the amount you're lending. This is called the *repo margin* or *haircut*.

*Reverse repo agreement* is the other side: lending funds by buying collateral. 
